Add blog post about the OTTL context inference feature (#6290)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2025/ottl-contexts-just-got-easier.md

---
title: OTTL contexts just got easier with context inference
linkTitle: OTTL contexts just got easier
date: 2025-02-17
author: '[Edmo Vamerlatti Costa](https://github.com/edmocosta) (Elastic)'
draft: true # TODO: remove this line once your post is ready to be published
issue: 6289
sig: Collector SIG
cSpell:ignore: OTTL Vamerlatti
---

Selecting the right context for running OTTL statements can be challenging, even
for experienced users. Choosing the correct context impacts both accuracy and
efficiency, as using higher-level contexts can avoid unnecessary iterations
through nested lower-level contexts.

To simplify this process, the OpenTelemetry community is excited to announce the
OTTL
[context inference](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/transformprocessor/README.md#context-inference)
support for the
[transform processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/transformprocessor).
This feature removes the need to manually specify contexts, improving statement
processing efficiency by automatically selecting the most appropriate one. This

> optimization ensures that data transformations are both accurate and performant.

Reviewer: I think we should highlight this point as it is the primary motivator for this work.

> optimization ensures that data transformations are both accurate and performant.

Author: > Should we also point out that soon this will make statements portable between components that use OTTL?

It's kind of mentioning it [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/6290/files#diff-34aed2660bd751b07ee7b7031b1171d91ab80dc9463584626ee01d70ee7a12f8R71), but without providing much details.

> optimization ensures that data transformations are both accurate and performant.

Author: > Not strictly necessary to mention this, and we touch on it when talking about the flat configuration style, but from a general UX standpoint, this change also relieves users from needing to know the concept of contexts and instead just think about the data they want to work with.

I've pushed an extra change mentioning that. Could you please take a look again? thanks!

## How it works?

Starting with version `0.120.0`, the transform processor supports two new
[context-inferred configuration](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/transformprocessor/README.md#context-inferred-configurations)
styles. The first one closely resembles the existing configuration format, while
the second offers a simpler and flatter approach.

### Structured configuration

The context-inferred structured configuration style closely resembles the
existing format. For example, consider the following configuration:

```yaml
metric_statements:
  - context: datapoint
    statements:
      - set(metric.description, "counter") where attributes["my.attr"] == "some"
```

It can now be written as:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```yaml
metric_statements:
  - statements:
      - set(metric.description, "counter") where datapoint.attributes["my.attr"] == "some"
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

In this example, the `context` value is suppressed and is automatically inferred
to `datapoint`, as it is the only context present in the statements that
supports parsing both`datapoint` and `metric` data.

> All paths in the statements must be prefixed with their respective contexts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To omit the `context` value, all paths in the statements must be prefixed with their respective contexts.
```

These prefixes are required for context-inferred configurations and serve as
hints for selecting the best match. It also makes statements unambiguous and
portable between components.

If we update the above configuration removing the `where` condition:

```yaml
metric_statements:
  - statements:
      - set(metric.description, "counter")
```

The context inferrer would select the `metric` context instead, since

> `datapoint` is no longer required, and although it would be possible to run the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
no data points are accessed. Although it would be possible to run the
```

statements using the`datapoint` context, `metric` is the most efficient option.

### Flat configuration

> The flat configuration style simplifies the configuration by allowing users to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The flat configuration style simplifies configuration by allowing users to
```
I think what's here is okay, but to me this reads a bit better.

list all statements together, without worrying about contexts or extra
configuration structures. This style support statements from multiple contexts
and does not require grouping them separately.

To illustrate this, compare the following configuration:

```yaml
metric_statements:
  - context: resource
    statements:
      - keep_keys(attributes, ["host.name"])
  - context: metric
    statements:
      - set(description, "Sum") where type == "Sum"
      - convert_sum_to_gauge() where name == "system.processes.count"
  - context: datapoint
    statements:
      - limit(attributes, 100, ["host.name"])
```

> With the new flat style configuration format, the same logic is expressed more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the new flat configuration style, the same logic is expressed more
```
Just to stay aligned with how it's been called above.

## How does it work?

Starting with version `0.120.0`, the transform processor supports two new
[context-inferred configuration](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/transformprocessor/README.md#context-inferred-configurations)
styles. The first one offers a simpler and flatter approach, while the second
closely resembles the existing configuration format.

### Flat configuration

The flat configuration style simplifies configuration by allowing users to list
all statements together, without worrying about contexts or extra configuration
structures. This style support statements from multiple contexts and does not
require grouping them separately.

To illustrate this, compare the following configuration:

```yaml
metric_statements:
  - context: resource
    statements:
      - keep_keys(attributes, ["host.name"])
  - context: metric
    statements:
      - set(description, "Sum") where type == "Sum"
      - convert_sum_to_gauge() where name == "system.processes.count"
  - context: datapoint
    statements:
      - limit(attributes, 100, ["host.name"])
```

> With the new flat configuration style, the same logic is expressed more
> concisely as:

Author: ```suggestion
With the new flat configuration style, the same logic is expressed more
concisely by simply providing a list of statements:
```

I think something like that would better fit here. WDYT?

> concisely as:

Reviewer 3: Looks good to me.

  - set(metric.description, "Sum") where metric.type == "Sum"
  - convert_sum_to_gauge() where metric.name == "system.processes.count"
  - limit(datapoint.attributes, 100, ["host.name"])
```

This streamlined approach enhances readability and makes configuration more
intuitive. Please note that all paths in the statements must be prefixed with
their respective contexts. These prefixes are required for all context-inferred
configurations and serve as hints for selecting the best match. It also makes
statements unambiguous and portable between components.

### Structured configuration

The context-inferred structured configuration style closely resembles the
existing format and allows users to leverage the benefits of context inference
while providing granular control over statement configurations, such as
`error_mode` and `conditions`. For example, consider the following
configuration:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```yaml
metric_statements:
  - context: datapoint
    conditions:
      - resource.attributes["service.name"] == "my.service"
    statements:
      - set(metric.description, "counter") where attributes["my.attr"] == "some"
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

> It can now be written as:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The above can now be written as:
```

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```yaml
metric_statements:
  - conditions:
      - resource.attributes["service.name"] == "my.service"
    statements:
      - set(metric.description, "counter") where datapoint.attributes["my.attr"] == "some"
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

In this example, the `context` value is omitted and is automatically inferred to
`datapoint`, as it is the only context present in the statements that supports
parsing both `datapoint` and `metric` data.

If we update the above configuration removing the `datapoint` usage:

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
```yaml
metric_statements:
  - conditions:
      - resource.attributes["service.name"] == "my.service"
    statements:
      - set(metric.description, "counter")
```
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

The context inferrer would select the `metric` context instead, since no data
points are accessed. Although it would be possible to run the statements using
the `datapoint` context, `metric` is the most efficient option.

> 

Reviewer 3: Missing here is probably a subsection stating when you should use which form. Users will generally want to know which they should generally prefer, and when.

Reviewer 3: I think some more opinionation is needed, yes. Each of those preludes describes a positive attribute of each mode, but there's no description of when you should use which one.

Author: I've added an extra section [here](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/6290/files#diff-34aed2660bd751b07ee7b7031b1171d91ab80dc9463584626ee01d70ee7a12f8R127), could you please take a look? Thanks!

Reviewer 3: Awesome, this looks great!

---
title: OTTL contexts just got easier with context inference
linkTitle: OTTL contexts just got easier

> date: 2025-02-17

Reviewer: We'd like to time this with releasing after the next collector release. Realistically it should definitely be out by Feb 20th.

author: '[Edmo Vamerlatti Costa](https://github.com/edmocosta) (Elastic)'
draft: true # TODO: remove this line once your post is ready to be published
issue: 6289
sig: Collector SIG
cSpell:ignore: OTTL Vamerlatti
---

Selecting the right OTTL context for running statements can be challenging, even
for experienced users. Choosing the correct option impacts both accuracy and
efficiency, as using higher-level OTTL contexts can avoid unnecessary iterations
through nested lower-level contexts.

To simplify this process, the OpenTelemetry community is excited to announce
OTTL
[context inference](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/transformprocessor/README.md#context-inference)
support for the
[transform processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/transformprocessor).

> This feature removes the need to manually specify OTTL contexts, improving
> statement processing efficiency by automatically selecting the most appropriate
> one. This optimization ensures that data transformations are both accurate and
> performant, allowing users to focus solely on their data without needing to
> understand the underlying concept of OTTL contexts.

Reviewer: I want to highlight we're doing this to make it easier to use OTTL

```suggestion
This feature removes the need to for users to understand the underlying context concept of OTTL, instead allowing them to focus solely on their data. It also improves statement processing efficiency by automatically selecting the most appropriate conetxt. This optimization ensures that data transformations are both accurate and performant.
```

Author: Done, thanks!

## How does it work?

Starting with version `0.120.0`, the transform processor supports two new
[context-inferred configuration](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/transformprocessor/README.md#context-inferred-configurations)
styles. The first one offers a simpler and flatter approach, while the second

> closely resembles the existing configuration format.

Reviewer: I'd like to get https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/pull/37909 merged and then we can update these links to point to the 2 new configuration sections.

Reviewer: merged, ready to update

Author: Done, configuration names and links are now updated.
